CS450 – Assignment 5: User-Level Threads and Mutex

Overview

    This project implements a cooperative user-level threading library along with a mutex for mutual exclusion. It runs on the MIT xv6-public (x86) environment.
    The main demonstration program (test_pc.c) simulates a producer-consumer scenario with multiple producers and consumers using a bounded buffer.

Features Implemented
    User-level threads:
        thread_init(), thread_create(), thread_yield(), thread_join()
        Each thread has its own stack and execution context
        Cooperative scheduling: threads yield control explicitly
    Mutex:
        mutex_init(), mutex_lock(), mutex_unlock()
        Ensures exclusive access to shared resources
    Producer-consumer demo:
        Two producers and two consumers
        Bounded buffer of size 8
        Correctly produces and consumes 200 items in total

Context Switching Approach
    Threads are cooperatively scheduled: each thread voluntarily calls thread_yield() to allow others to run.
    Thread context (registers, stack pointer, instruction pointer) is saved and restored using user-level context switching.
    ach thread has a private stack allocated at creation.

Test 1 – Producer/Consumer (test_pc.c)
    Observed Results:
        Producers generated unique values:
            Producer 1: 1000 … 1099
            Producer 2: 2000 … 2099
    Consumers consumed all items correctly:
        Consumer 1: 100 … 2049
        Consumer 2: 1050 … 2099
    Buffer behavior:
        Count never exceeds buffer size (N=8)
        FIFO order is maintained
    No deadlocks or data corruption observed

Test 2 – Simple Thread Test (result_threads.c)
    Setup:
        Create one thread that prints a message
        Main thread yields and then joins the created thread
    Observed Output:
        created thread 0
        thread 1 running
        back in main
        done

Limitations
    Maximum threads supported: 8 (current implementation; can be increased by adjusting the thread array size)
    Stack size per thread: fixed
    Cooperative only: no preemption; threads must yield explicitly
    Shared address space: all threads share heap and global values
How to Run
    Build xv6-public kernel:
        make clean
        make
    Run xv6 in QEMU:
        make qemu
    Run the test program inside xv6:
        $ test_pc
        $ test_thread
